
All books in the OT are anonymously written in a time we do not know.
Spanning over 100+ years!

People hear this and it is scandalous 

## Text within the Text:

- [[Deut-31]](9) - What did Moses write (Torah) and put in the ark? 
	- [[Deut-34]](5) - Did Moses write about his own death??
		- Moses wasn't responsible for the material that predated to him or after him... someone has to have compiled all of these stories together.
- [[Jer-36]](32) - What does it mean that other words were added?
	- Baruch son of Neriah wrote Jeremiah, but whose words did he add
	- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baruch_ben_Neriah - Archeological evidence of him 

[[Prov-25]](1)- copied by men of Hezekiah
	- 250 years separate Hezekiah and Solomon 
[[Prov-24]](23) - Who are "the wise"??
[[Prov-30]] - Who is Agur?
[[Prov-31]] - Who is king Lemuel? Not a king from Israel, most likely a king of the nations around them 

These texts speak a word to God's people that he wants them to hear
	- Even the writings of a pagan king

We don't have a fresh copy of the recent copies of the Hebrew bible, what do we have??

## Manuscripts

### Masoretic text (Masorites)
- Hebrew manuscripts generated by jewish scholars over 500 years
- Traditional guardians of biblical texts
- hyper miticulous care of the bible
- Leningrad codex - 1008 AD
	- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leningrad_Codex
	- [[Exod-15]]()- artistic forms used traditionally
	- [[Lev-11]](42)- belly/stomach
		- 3rd letter of word is written larger, bc the letter is the middle letter in Torah
			- they took tallies for every letter written 
	- #Talmud: "When I [Rav Meir] came to Rabbi Yishmael, he said to me, 'My son, what is your occupation?' I told him, 'I am a scribe', and he said to me, 'Be meticulous in your work, for your work is the work of heaven—perhaps you will omit one letter or add one letter; you would thereby destroy the entire world'" ([Eiruvin 13a](https://www.sefaria.org/Eruvin.13a?lang=he-en&utm_source=torahinmotion.org&utm_medium=sefaria_linker)).
		- Every generation of scribes was like this
	- They would put footnotes in the text (circles)
		- usually in Aramaic, describing the word, spelling, textual commentary, etc. 
		- Helping the next groups of scribes once a new manuscript had to be published

### Septuagint 
- Greek translation of Hebrew bible - 200-100 BC
	- Pre-Christian translation 

Alexander the great - imposed Greek culture and language throughout his conquering 
	- people are speaking Greek instead of Hebrew

Not a Hebrew manuscript but helps us understand the Hebrew behind it
The Greek Hebrew bible was the Christian bible through time as it spread throughout the world.

[[Gen-04]](8) - Masoretic text does not have "Let's go out to the field"
	- Some will say that the scribe skipped this phrase at some point 
	- This exists in Septuagint and matches other Hebrew manuscripts

Usually you will see the extra added phrase in the Masoretic texts and not in the Septuagint 
- Small additions 
	- explanatory phrases or words from other parts of the bible
	- scribes trying to help the next generation of scribes understand the text

Codex Sinaiticus
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Codex_Sinaiticus
- tradition of the Septuagint 

### Dead sea scrolls
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dead_Sea_Scrolls
200BC -70AD

Hebrew manuscripts written around the same time as the Septuagint

macabean revolt (mid 100's BC)
- many people did not like them so Esseans defected from the macabean kingdom 
	- monastery community 

story: 
	Shepherds throwing rocks heard shattering of pottery
	1st appeared on black market in new york times add

All books found except book of ester

Some match the Masoretic texts, Some match Hebrew text underneath Septuagint
	-The shape of the biblical text at this time was complicated


## Discussion / Questions:
We have to accept a Human + Divine element to the project of the Bible. 
	- This correlates to the life of Jesus
	- Somehow you have to be able to look at these things and ask "What does that mean?"

What makes some authors inspired and others not, or other text's not?
What does it mean that the text is inspired? 

Did Moses actually write Genesis 1 as a poem with all these connections to others texts??
	- Or did someone compile 
	- Even if he did not, it is not letter for letter his truth still remains
		- what matters is that God conveyed his truth through the ages 

The earliest manuscripts are still 2,000 years later than when first written down, how do we know changes haven't been made?
	- There was a greater communal component, less individualism
		- This was their story telling
	- Why would we think they would do better with preserving the text than 
		- It is shown that they were very unfaithful to righteousness could they be faithful to the text??
		- Could they have carried the stories better than they kept them? 
		- Would Israel have kept the stories of their failure in if they were editing the story? 
		- Story of Elijah - the #remnant
			- It just requires a remnant not a majority
		- All along the scriptures have had some dependance on the #spirit 

Is the bible infallible?
	- Infallible- Google: Incapable of being wrong
			- This can't literally mean that each word is perfect
		- It can be perfectly trustworthy and true even with minor word discrepancies 
		- Whether or not one verse is right or wrong, the truth still remains
			- *It will still accomplish the purpose for which it was given*
	- even in the instances in which there are differences between texts, it makes us think critically an ultimately accomplishes it's purpose. 
	- If you ride a hard line you won't be able to read the bible at all

It is so much easier to trust my bible when I trust: 
- God was involved & so where humans
	- Therefore it can't be perfect 
	- Therefore there is a cultural element and we should use cultural texts ideas to help us understand it.

Scroll found by king Josiah

So many parallels to modern day bible translation debates
	- Is the bible the bible if it is not 100% perfect?
	- How can I give the KJV to a kid today?
	- There was a good heart behind keeping translations consistent, but how is it practical for us to transfer wisdom.
	- Can I trust the NIV? Is it true?
		- We believe so...

"I am convinced of something but I can see how someone else is not, and the other way around. This relives a lot of stress in community and the story."